# Price Provider FAQ

## What can I do to generate strong random numbers?

Use already available random number generators that provide a cryptographically secure (pseudo) random number generator. One good example would be the `csprng` library for `nodejs` applications. Keep in mind that you can submit randoms with 256 bits so try to use all the bits for entropy. Strong random numbers can also be generated by using Web3 utils: `web3.utils.toBN(web3.utils.randomHex(32))`

## How do I calculate hash for the commit-reveal scheme?

The full and up-to-date specification for the commit-reveal scheme is available in specifications on the flare [smart contract repo](https://gitlab.com/flarenetwork/flare-smart-contracts/-/blob/master/docs/specs/PriceProvider.md).

The following code snippets demonstrate how hashes can be generated in typescript and python using publicly available web3 libraries.

=== "Typescript"

     ```typescript
     import BN from "bn.js";
     import {
         BigNumber
     } from "ethers";
     import {
         ethers
     } from "hardhat";
     const MIN_RANDOM = web3.utils.toBN(2).pow(web3.utils.toBN(128));

     function submitHash(ftsoIndices: (number | BN | BigNumber)[],
         prices: (number | BN | BigNumber)[],
         random: number | BN | BigNumber,
         address: string): string {

         return ethers.utils.keccak256(web3.eth.abi.encodeParameters(
             ["uint256[]", "uint256[]", "uint256", "address"],
             [ftsoIndices, prices, random, address]));
     }
     const ftsoIndices = [0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10];
     const randoms = [MIN_RANDOM, MIN_RANDOM.addn(5), MIN_RANDOM.addn(1059),
         MIN_RANDOM.addn(10682), MIN_RANDOM.addn(159726)
     ];
     const prices = [0, 1, 2, 3, 5, 10, 50, 100, 101, 10 ** 5 + 1, 10 ** 8];
     const addrs = [accounts[10], accounts[11], accounts[12], accounts[13]];

     console.log(`Prices: ${prices}`);
     for(let addr of addrs) {
         console.log(`Address: ${addr}`);
         for(let random of randoms) {
             console.log(`\tRandom: ${random}`)
             const hash = submitHash(ftsoIndices, prices, random, addr);
             console.log(`\t\t${hash}`);
         }
     }
     ```

===  "Python"

     ```python
     from typing import List
     from web3 import Web3
     import eth_abi


     def submit_price_hash(
         ftsoIndices: List[int], prices: List[int], random: int, address: str
     ) -> str:
         assert len(ftsoIndices) == len(prices)
         assert list(sorted(ftsoIndices)) == ftsoIndices and len(
             set(ftsoIndices)
         ) == len(ftsoIndices), "Indices are non increasing"
         return Web3.keccak(
             eth_abi.encode_abi(
                 ["uint256[]", "uint256[]", "uint256", "address"],
                 [ftsoIndices, prices, random, address],
             )
         ).hex()


     def test_fun(
         prices: List[int],
         random: int,
         address="0xD7de703D9BBC4602242D0f3149E5fFCD30Eb3ADF",
     ) -> List[str]:
         return submit_price_hash(list(range(len(prices))), prices, random, address)


     addrs = [
         "0xD7de703D9BBC4602242D0f3149E5fFCD30Eb3ADF",
         "0xEa960515F8b4C237730F028cBAcF0a28E7F45dE0",
         "0x3d91185a02774C70287F6c74Dd26d13DFB58ff16",
     ]
     prices = [0, 1, 2, 3, 5, 10, 50, 100, 101, 10 ** 5 + 1, 10 ** 8]
     randoms = [0, 1, 100, 101, 100000000000000000000]
     for addr in addrs:
         print(f"Address: {addr}")
         for rand in randoms:
             print(f"  Random: {rand}")
             print("    hash:", test_fun(prices, rand, addr))
         print()
     ```

## Where can I find the contracts I need to interact with as a price provider?

The `PriceSubmitter` contract is deployed at a fixed [address](https://songbird-explorer.flare.network/address/0x1000000000000000000000000000000000000003): `0x1000000000000000000000000000000000000003`. All the other contracts are available as read methods on the `PriceSubmitter` contract. You should periodically check for updates to have up to date information. Any important updates and contract changes will be broadcasted to the community.

## Where can I browse the source code and documentation for contracts?

All the important contracts are verified on the [blockscout](https://songbird-explorer.flare.network/blocks) explorer. The main smart contract repo is referenced here [important-links.md](../../developing-on-top-of-flare/important-links.md).

## What are the important contracts I need to be aware of to be a price provider?

1. The most important is the `PriceSubmitter` where you submit prices. It also has links to the below contracts.
2. `FtsoRegistry`: Holds information about specific FTSOs, their symbols, indices and addresses.
3. `FTSOManager`: Holds epoch and voting related configuration data and oversees all FTSOs, also gives access to additional useful contracts such as `Inflation and` `Supply` contracts.
4. `VoterWhitelister`: The contract where a price provider list themselves to submit prices.

## How much does it cost to submit prices as price provider?

Price submissions and reveals are currently discounted and it costs approximately 3-4 SGB per day if all the submission and reveal transactions are successful.

## Where can I see for which FTSOs I am eligible to submit prices?

Each address is whitelisted separately for each FTSO contract. There are two ways to query whitelisting data, one through the `VoterWhitelister` contract, the other through the `PriceSubmitter` contract.

## How to read whitelisted addresses using the `VoterWhitelister` contract?

Per FTSO there is an array of whitelisted addresses. Open the [contract](https://songbird-explorer.flare.network/address/0xa76906EfBA6dFAe155FfC4c0eb36cDF0A28ae24D/read-contract) and use function #4 `getFtsoWhitelistedPriceProviders`. Set the required index and check if your address is in this list.

## How to read whitelisted addresses using the the `PriceSubmitter` contract?

Open the [contract](https://songbird-explorer.flare.network/address/0x1000000000000000000000000000000000000003/read-contract) and use function #8 `voterWhitelistBitmap` where you should set the address your would like to query. The function returns a bitmap corresponding to allowed FTSO indices in big-endian format. If you were allowed to submit princess for FTSOs with indices 0, 1 and 3, the returned bitmap would be 11 (in binary `1011`)

## Which currencies are available on the network?

The best way to get available currencies is to query the `FtsoRegistry` that holds information about available FTSOs, their addresses, prices and indices. Songbird currently supports the following symbols: `[XRP, LTC, XLM, DOGE, ADA, ALGO, BCH, DGB, BTC, ETH, FIL, SGB]`, but new ones could be added by governance vote.

## Is there a slashing mechanism for non-availability?

There is currently no slashing for not providing a price. If you do not provide a price in a specific price epoch, your can not gain reward in that epoch. So the unavailability has a direct negative impact on your reward rate as a price provider.

## The network time is not the same as local time, is there something wrong?

Due to the decentralized state of the network, one might experience some occasional time drifts (+-30s). We suggest you keep synchronized local time with global time through Network Time Protocol (NTP) to avoid missing any important submit/reveal periods.

## Where can I get information on which prices are rewarded

Each FTSO emits a `PriceFinalized` event that contains information about calculated median price and rewarding bounds.

## How can I see who has delegated to me

There is currently no on-chain structure that holds the relevant data. You might want to listen to events emitted by delegations.

## The NPM library is written in Typescript, can I use another language to write a price provider?

You are free to use any language to run the price provider. Though some might be more suitable than others. Try using a language that offers good support for Ethereum smart contracts, eg. `web3-your-language`.  Many successful price providers use different technologies such as: go, C#, python.

## Is there any code for writing a price provider in Python?

This [gist](https://gist.github.com/jO-Osko/a9e8904cb3e8f9af5f154302117b4444) showcases the calculation of submit hashes in python using the `web3py` library.

## Are delegations transferable between different addresses?

Delegations are currently not transferable. Specifically, you can't redelegate the vote power that was delegated to your address.

## Does the price epoch vary with each FTSO?

No, price epoch configurations are governed by `FtsoManager` (you can get them using the `getPriceEpochConfiguration` method). This is necessary so that all submissions (and reveals) can happen at the same time.

## Can price epoch duration change?

Price epoch durations are generally fixed and will not change abruptly. Any such change will be broadcasted to the community and be part of a governance decision.

## Why am I getting strange reverts on submission?

One reason could be related to the status of your node. Make sure the node is healthy and has enough peers. See [observation-node-faq.md](../setting-up-an-observation-node/observation-node-faq.md)
