# Contract Addresses

The most secure way to retrieve contract addresses is [from the blockchain itself](#retrieval-from-blockchain).

Alternatively, you can also get the addresses [from the blockchain's source code](#retrieval-from-source-code).

!!! attention

    Applications should NOT have Flare contract addresses in their source code, as these might change from time to time.

    Instead, applications are strongly encouraged to retrieve any contract address they need directly from the blockchain.

## Retrieval from Blockchain

The `PriceSubmitter` smart contract is deployed in the Genesis block at an **immutable** address: `0x1000000000000000000000000000000000000003`, both on Flare and Songbird.

From it, the following contract addresses can be retrieved:

- `FTSOManager`: `PriceSubmitter.getFtsoManager()`
    - Individual `FTSO` contracts: `FtsoManager.getFtsos()`
    - `FTSORewardManager`: `FtsoManager.rewardManager()`
        - `WNat`: `FtsoRewardManager.wNat()`
        - `ClaimSetupManager`: `FtsoRewardManager.claimSetupManager`
- `FTSORegistry`: `PriceSubmitter.getFtsoRegistry()`
- `FTSOWhitelister`: `PriceSubmitter.voterWhitelister()`

Additionally, on the Flare Network, there is also a handy contract named `AddressUpdater` accessible through the `PriceSubmitter` which lists all other contracts via the `getContractNamesAndAddresses()` method.

- `AddressUpdater`: `PriceSubmitter.getAddressUpdater()`

## Retrieval from Source Code

The [Flare Smart Contracts repository](https://gitlab.com/flarenetwork/flare-smart-contracts) contains an autogenerated JSON file listing the latest deployed addresses of all Flare contracts.

You can find this file in the `deployment/deploys` folder, and parse it to retrieve the addresses of any Flare contract.

!!! attention

    As stated at the beginning, applications should NOT have Flare contract addresses in their source code, as these might change from time to time.

    Instead, applications are strongly encouraged to retrieve any contract address they need directly from the blockchain.

|           | Flare                         | Songbird                         |
| --------- | ----------------------------- | -------------------------------- |
| Branch    | `flare_network_deployed_code` | `songbird_network_deployed_code` |
| JSON file | [flare.json][f-json]          | [songbird.json][s-json]          |

[f-json]: https://gitlab.com/flarenetwork/flare-smart-contracts/-/blob/flare_network_deployed_code/deployment/deploys/flare.json
[s-json]: https://gitlab.com/flarenetwork/flare-smart-contracts/-/blob/songbird_network_deployed_code/deployment/deploys/songbird.json
